Background
==========

We, the Research Engineering Group, are a team of about 20 people. We work predominantly on projects, usually either on one project or on two projects. We also do other things -- random support to the institute, admin, training, and so on.

The term "project" is not precisely defined (which is in itself part of the problem), but the characteristics of our project work is that it is usually time limited (anywhere from a few weeks to a year); it involves producing some kind of more-or-less well-defined output; and it has a "client". 

We need to track two things: first, what projects will we all be working on over the next year, insofar as they are known. We need to know this so we can plan our availability for new projects. Second, what time we have spent on projects. We need to know that so that we can "bill" our "clients" (which means recovering our costs from some funding pool).


Our old approach to project planning
====================================

In the old days, when we were fewer than ten people, we did all this through a "planning board", informally known as "the Board". I've attached a photo of it. Actually, when this photo was taken the Board had grown to three boards.

It worked like this: Each row represents half a person and each column is a month. (Strictly speaking, each row is 40% FTE, because we reserve 20% of our time for non-project work.) To block out the agreed project scope, we write the name of the project across one or more rows; and put a mark in the corresponding grid squares for the months of the project. 

Separately, each individual has a stack of coloured rectangles, two for each month of the year, identified with their name and the month. When we actually allocate an individual to a project, we put their paper rectangle in the corresponding part of the grid. 

The old way solved the planning problem reasonably well: we couldn't allocate more than all of a person because there were only two pieces of paper with their name on it for each month. And we could see at a glance what was coming up, when we had free capacity, and who was available. We did a bit of rescheduling too: from time to time, we might move the end date of a project. 

It also let the team see at a glance what projects were coming up that they might want to work on; and people were able to "swap" by moving their bits of paper around.

It was also a fantastic visual piece of PR for the group. When visitors came we could say "here's what we're doing" and when people asked us to start on some project right away we could say "here's what we'd have to stop doing in order to do that."

However, the old way did not scale to 20 people. (It didn't really copy very well with ten people, to be honest.) We no longer have the Board.


The new way
===========

We use two online systems: "Harvest" (for the past) and "Forecast" (for the future). 

In "Harvest", each team member records their weekly time as they spent it. We have a reasonably sensible set of "projects" against which to record time. 

We want this time tracker to record what people /actually/ do, insofar as that makes sense. So we also have "projects" for the various kinds of non-project activity that we do. A nominal day is 8 hours and a nominal week is 40 hours. 

However, if someone is allocated "full-time" to a project, and they spend an hour in one day in, say, a team meeting, we don't necessarily bother recording that hour. (We are going to "bill" the client a full day anyway, since a full day means "a normal working day" which /includes/ things like all-staff meetings, management activities, and so on.)

However, we will record an activity that takes up more than 2 hours in a day. We are not consistent in what we do with lots of bitty things during the day that add up to more than 2 hours.

However, we do NOT use Harvest for deciding what time to bill to projects, just for the reason above. 

In "Forecast" we are supposed to record the time scheduled for each "project". Mostly we have done this (but, for example, I don't trust the resource allocated in the system for the projects on which I am working).

Our plan is that we will "bill" from "Forecast". Separately, we will track what we actually do (in "Harvest") and from time to time we may adjust the scheduled time in "Forecast" to true-up. 

This means that in "Harvest", the data about week N are /fixed/ at the end of week N. However, in "Forecast", we may from time to time change the state of the database both backwards and forwards in time from "now". "Forecast" does not have facility to record a snapshot of its state as of a given time, so we may thereby lose information. 

All of this is still being worked out. 


The challenge
=============

My worry is: will we actually be able to use the data in these systems for the purposes we want? 

And I believe the only way to test this is to actually do whatever it is we need to do. 

So what I think would be incredibly valuable is some /automated/ system that produces, from "Harvest" and "Forecast" the same visualisation as was provided by the Board. It has to be automated, otherwise we won't do it. By "automated", I mean "I enter a command and it runs from there."

My plan is that we would produce a new visualisation (of the Board) every week, by running some program. If the system is working, this would provide all the benefits that the Board used to provide. However if, as I believe, there are glitches, then we will have to fix those glitches in order to make it work!

So that's the challenge. There are lots of subsidiary challenges:

- what programming language should you use?
- how can it interface with Harvest and Forecast?
- what's a project anyway?
- what should the visualisation look like to best convey the required information?
- and other things we don't know yet.


First steps
===========

What I would suggest you do for the first, say, 2 or 3 weeks, is to investigate Harvest and Forecast, talk to lots of us (and make us opine), and write a "backbrief". In the backbrief you should outline your understanding of the challenge and a proposed way forward. Backbriefs are informal and opinionated, but technical. I attach an example I wrote for a project a while ago.

